# The State of Open Source Design’s community and governance

*Please note: This document and proposal has been written from the solo perspective of one core maintainer member of open source design’s community (Eriol Fox)*

Open Source Design is 10 years old in 2025 (https://opensourcedesign.net/milestones). In 2015 designers who had been working in and contributing to OSS met across social media, lamented on the lack of dedicated space for multi-practice designers to gather and speak on their expertise and experiences and organised the first open source design devroom at FOSDEM 2015. Since then, there has been a FOSDEM open source design dev room every year and as the community has grown, expanded, diversified and formalised they have maintained a valuable resource for the wider OSS ecosystem in the form of a ‘jobs’ board where OSS projects and designers can indicate their design contribution need or what kind of OSS project they want to get involved in. Alongside this the open source design core maintainers and wider community have kept a series of resources, forum, events, community call and other activities in the OSS focussed on the broad practice of ‘design’ alive and thriving.

The origins of the Open Source Design community maintainers was loose and adhoc. At the point of creation there was uncertainty that open source design would survive let alone thrive so the need for governance was set at minimal viable governance and intentionally set up more as a loose ‘banner’ under which any designer globally could benefit from the name/label of ‘open source design’ as long as what that individual was doing aligned with our published and community agreed goals (https://opensourcedesign.net/goals/) and manifesto (https://opensourcedesign.net/manifesto/). 

However, time changes the needs for a community and label. As more people learned about, relied on and joined open source design as community members the expectations of the core (maintainer) members and the open source design community as a whole increased. This largely came about after our open collective community funds grew close to and then surpassed 10k USD (our typical operating costs being around $200 USD per annum for web hosting and other connected services plus adhoc $200 USD here and there for merch printing costs for stickers, cards, banners etc.). Some core members realised that these funds could be used in a way that furthered our goals and manifesto. This is when we came across the initial problem that because we had no established governance structures to discuss, propose, agree and distribute funds we also lacked those processes for any discussions or differences of opinion across the core maintainers and wider community. This then quickly exposed a lack of accountability for most/all of the core maintenance efforts which had defaulted to a ‘do-ocracy’ aka ‘who ever steps up and does the work’ approach to tasks/maintenance as well as there being no clear idea for wider community members as to what open source design did as an organisation and what it was able to systemically influence upon wider OSS practices. Also exposed were a lack of accountability in our code of conduct procedures (though we have a public code of conduct) and when a core member can be removed or step down from core member status. There are many listed core members, as of Fall 2025, that have not contributed, interacted or maintained anything regarding open source design for between 6 months and 2+ years. We do not have a way of removing people from maintainer access or appointing maintainer access that is well documented and follows a trusted procedure visible by the wider community and OSS space. Core member/maintainer status comes with inherent security risks as these members have access to communications, accounts, passwords and repository permissions that could put the entire project at risk.

To finish the current state of play, we have also had casual complaints from new and existing community members that open source design is not stepping up to fill the need in the OSS community that the community want to see. That members from marginalised communities and identities feel unable to assert their thoughts, opinions, needs and ideas to the existing core member team and that the lack of any documented processes means that people in the community are lost for how to speak up and let the existing people in positions of relative power know what they want. These community members do understand that the state of the open source design community, core member team and OSS space generally has changed dramatically in the last 10 years and what served the community well in 2015 simply is no longer serving the needs of the community in 2025.

In 2023 between 2-4 members of the core maintainer members sought pro-bono assistance from an NGO that focussed on building capacity and community around technology for social change, inclusive of OSS technology and community. We had two meetings in 2023 and 2024 to begin the process of discuss evolving our governance that did not progress.


## What we need

In order for the open source design community to document, organise and govern effectively it needs to be a funded effort. The lack of current governing responsibility means that if current core members are engaged and interested, they participate. If they are not, they do not and this stalls any and all progression. 

We’re asking for funding of up to $8,000 USD (open to expert advice on how much would be needed to coordinate a 15 person governance process) to hire in a governance consultant to guide, coordinate, communicate and progress the discussions on governance. With this will be deadlines and limits to participation from core members that are currently disengaged with a proposed process of how to respect their past efforts and contributions without their inaction hindering progression/evolution.

*Responsibilities include:*
Coordinating existing documents related to governance.
Conducting information gathering from wider community on wants and expectations  of core member governance going forward.
Inclusion of marginalised people and identities as priority for sustainable future of open source design.
Consultation meetings/communication with existing core members on the status of their involvement and what they want/need to be included and/or progress to alumni status (if relevant).
Draft documentation of policies, procedures and governance for asynchronous and synchronous feedback from core and wider community. 
Financial governance polices and procedures for managing current and future funds.
Draft documentation of governance processes for roles and responsibilities relating to the open source design project needs and maintenance efforts.
Review Code of Conduct and reporting process and committee.
Membership, both core and wider community clarification and responsibilities with what security and account access and procedures.
Any other relevant or needed governance documents with reasonable time expectations.


We would like to indicate our interest in documenting this process openly throughout in order to allow other OSS projects to learn from our experiences.
